README.md, before:

### **Discover-Focus-Act (DFA) Framework**

### **Overview**
The **Discover-Focus-Act (DFA) Framework** is a practical tool for solving problems and creating actionable plans. Offering clear steps, flexibility, and impactful outcomes, it guides individuals, teams, or workshops through three key stages: Discover, Focus, and Act. This framework ensures **clarity**, **focus**, and **measurable results**. Ideal for sessions lasting 60 minutes or broken into smaller segments, DFA helps drive progress efficiently.

---

### **Why Choose the DFA Framework**  
- Simple and intuitive, with no extensive training required.  
- Clear steps and prompts to guide facilitators through actionable inquiry.  
- Bridges the gap between problem analysis and actionable steps.  
- Promotes clarity, measurable outcomes, and practical results.  
- Fosters collaboration, alignment, and accountability.

---

### **When to Use the DFA Framework**
- Tackling complex problems.
- Aligning teams on priorities.
- Developing action plans for immediate implementation.
- Suitable for both personal and professional contexts.

---

### **Icebreaker Activity (5 Minutes - optional if problem is not yet understood)**
**Purpose**: Energise participants and create a collaborative atmosphere to understand the problem.  
**Instructions**:  
- Ask: *“If this problem were a headline in tomorrow’s newspaper, what would it say?”*  
- Let everyone share their headlines (funny, serious, or creative). This helps engage participants and sets a collaborative tone.  
- Once all participants have shared, encourage everyone to agree on a headline that best captures the essence of the problem. This reinforces alignment on the issue and helps participants focus on the problem statement.  

**Time-saving Alternative to Icebreaker**: If short on time, participants can silently brainstorm and write down a problem statement.

**Output**: Problem Statement  

**Transition to Discover**:  
*“Now that we’ve identified our collective Problem Statement, let’s dive deeper to fully understand the problem and define what success looks like.”*

---

### **Steps**

#### **1. Discover (20 Minutes)**  
**Input**: Problem Statement  
**Purpose**: Understand the problem and clarify desired outcomes.  

**Instructions**:  
- Explore the issue from multiple perspectives to clarify the current situation and desired outcomes. Begin by defining the overarching problem, then deconstruct it into manageable components.  
- Use the prompts to guide conversations and ensure a comprehensive understanding of the problem and what success looks like.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What’s the issue?* Describe the current state of the problem.  
- *What do we want to achieve?* Define the desired outcome.  

**Tool**: Complete the "Discover" step in the DFA Template.  
**Output**: Current Situation  

**Transition to Focus**:  
*“With a clearer understanding of the problem and what we hope to achieve, let’s determine which areas to prioritise and tackle first.”*

---

#### **2. Focus (20 Minutes)**  
**Input**: Current Situation  
**Purpose**: Identify and prioritise critical action areas.  

**Instructions**:  
- Review the insights from the Discover step and determine the most critical areas for immediate action. Focus on elements that can deliver maximum impact within a short timeframe.  
- Use dot voting to identify critical areas for action.
- Use the prompts to facilitate prioritisation and keep the focus on achievable, high-impact areas.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What’s most important to address first?* Prioritise the most critical components.  
- *What can we realistically achieve now?* Focus on actions that are feasible in the short term.  
- *What’s the impact of addressing this now?* Assess the immediate benefit of tackling this priority.  

**Tool**: Use the "Focus" step in the DFA Template to narrow down focus.  
**Output**: Key Priority  

**Transition to Act**:  
*“Now that we’ve identified our top priority, let’s translate it into a clear and actionable plan to begin making progress right away.”*

---

#### **3. Act (20 Minutes)**  
**Input**: Key Priority  
**Purpose**: Develop a clear, actionable plan.  

**Instructions**:  
- Transform your prioritised insights into a concrete plan. Discuss what can be done immediately, assign roles, and ensure the steps are practical and achievable.  
- Assign clear ownership for each action step to avoid ambiguity.
- Use the prompts to guide discussions and craft a detailed, actionable plan that participants can confidently implement.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What one step can we take immediately?* Identify the first step that can be taken without delay.  
- *What resources or support do we need?* Define the necessary tools, people, or resources.  
- *How will we measure progress?* Establish measurable success criteria with clear metrics.  
- *What will success look like?* Define tangible outcomes that signal progress or completion, ensuring alignment with the core objectives.  

**Tool**: Complete the "Act" step in the DFA Template.  
**Output**: Action Plan  

**Transition to Feedback**:  
*“With our plan ready, it’s time to put it into action. Once implemented, we’ll gather feedback to evaluate its effectiveness and refine where necessary.”*

---

### **Next Steps**  
Once the action plan is underway, revisit the DFA Framework regularly to refine priorities or adjust the course as needed. This iterative approach ensures continued progress and improvement.

**Transition to Gathering Feedback**:  
*“After implementing the plan, we’ll reflect on the results to celebrate successes, identify improvements, and continue building on what we’ve accomplished.”*

---

### **Gathering Feedback**  
**Purpose**: Reflect on outcomes after implementing the action plan.  

**Instructions**:  
- Encourage open and honest feedback to identify what worked, what didn’t, and what could be improved. Use this input to refine future plans and adapt as necessary.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What worked well?* Identify successes.  
- *What didn’t work?* Assess challenges and areas for improvement.  
- *How can we refine the plan?* Adjust based on feedback and insights.  

**Closing Reflection**:  
*“Feedback is key to progress. By reflecting on today’s outcomes, we can continue to refine our approach and ensure we’re moving in the right direction.”*

---

### **Features**
- **Duration**: 60 minutes (20 minutes per step).  
- **Audience**: Suitable for individuals, teams, or workshops.  
- **Output**: A focused, actionable plan ready for immediate implementation.  

---

### **DFA Framework Template**
Use this template to guide your session:

| Steps    | Inputs            | Questions                                 | Answers | Outputs           | Artifacts | Notes |
|----------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------|-------------------|-----------|-------|
| Discover | Problem Statement | What’s the issue?                         |         | Current Situation |           |       |
|          |                   | What do we want to achieve?               |         |                   |           |       |
| Focus    | Current Situation | What’s most important to address first?   |         | Key Priorities    |           |       |
|          |                   | What can we realistically achieve now?    |         |                   |           |       |
|          |                   | What’s the impact of addressing this now? |         |                   |           |       |
| Act      | Key Priorities    | What one step can we take now?            |         | Action Plan       |           |       |
|          |                   | What support do we need?                  |         |                   |           |       |
|          |                   | How will we measure progress?             |         |                   |           |       |
|          |                   | What will success look like?              |         |                   |           |       |

---

### **Visual Representation Model**
The DFA Framework is depicted as a **target diagram** with concentric circles:
- Outer Circle: **Discover** (Blue, Magnifying Glass Icon).  
- Middle Circle: **Focus** (Green, Target Icon).  
- Inner Circle: **Act** (Orange, Arrow Icon).  
- Centre Circle: **Action Plan** (Yellow, Star Icon).  

![DFA Framework Model](./resources/DFA-framework.png)

---

### **Examples**
Add Examples [TODO]

---

### **Getting Started**
1. Clone this repository:  
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/uijaz/DFA-Framework.git
   ```  
2. Explore the provided downloadable PDF templates and worksheets in the `resources` folder.  [TODO]
3. Follow the 3-step process in a 60-minute session or at your own pace.  

---

### **Repository Structure**
```
DFA-Framework/
├── README.md                # Project overview  
├── LICENSE                  # License information  
├── resources/               # Templates and worksheets [TODO] 
│   ├── DFA-Framework.png  
└── examples/                # Use case examples [TODO] 
```

---

### **License**
This project is licensed under the **Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 (CC BY 4.0)** for documentation and templates. See the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.

---

### **Acknowledgements**
Thank you to all contributors and testers of this framework.

---

### **Contributing**
Contributions are welcome! To contribute:  
1. Fork the repository.  
2. Create a new branch for your feature or fix.  
3. Submit a pull request with a clear description of your changes.
4. Contact me below to start the conversation.

---

### **Contact**
For questions or feedback, feel free to reach out via GitHub Issues or connect on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/uijaz/).

Commit message:

Add section For Experienced Facilitators

README.md, after:

### **Discover-Focus-Act (DFA) Framework**

### **Overview**
The **Discover-Focus-Act (DFA) Framework** is a practical tool for solving problems and creating actionable plans. Offering clear steps, flexibility, and impactful outcomes, it guides individuals, teams, or workshops through three key stages: Discover, Focus, and Act. This framework ensures **clarity**, **focus**, and **measurable results**. Ideal for sessions lasting 60 minutes or broken into smaller segments, DFA helps drive progress efficiently.

---

### **Why Choose the DFA Framework**  
- Simple and intuitive, with no extensive training required.  
- Clear steps and prompts to guide facilitators through actionable inquiry.  
- Bridges the gap between problem analysis and actionable steps.  
- Promotes clarity, measurable outcomes, and practical results.  
- Fosters collaboration, alignment, and accountability.

---

### **When to Use the DFA Framework**
- Tackling complex problems.
- Aligning teams on priorities.
- Developing action plans for immediate implementation.
- Suitable for both personal and professional contexts.

---

### **Icebreaker Activity (5 Minutes - optional if problem is not yet understood)**
**Purpose**: Energise participants and create a collaborative atmosphere to understand the problem.  
**Instructions**:  
- Ask: *“If this problem were a headline in tomorrow’s newspaper, what would it say?”*  
- Let everyone share their headlines (funny, serious, or creative). This helps engage participants and sets a collaborative tone.  
- Once all participants have shared, encourage everyone to agree on a headline that best captures the essence of the problem. This reinforces alignment on the issue and helps participants focus on the problem statement.  

**Time-saving Alternative to Icebreaker**: If short on time, participants can silently brainstorm and write down a problem statement.

**Output**: Problem Statement  

**Transition to Discover**:  
*“Now that we’ve identified our collective Problem Statement, let’s dive deeper to fully understand the problem and define what success looks like.”*

---

### **Steps**

#### **1. Discover (20 Minutes)**  
**Input**: Problem Statement  
**Purpose**: Understand the problem and clarify desired outcomes.  

**Instructions**:  
- Explore the issue from multiple perspectives to clarify the current situation and desired outcomes. Begin by defining the overarching problem, then deconstruct it into manageable components.  
- Use the prompts to guide conversations and ensure a comprehensive understanding of the problem and what success looks like.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What’s the issue?* Describe the current state of the problem.  
- *What do we want to achieve?* Define the desired outcome.  

**Tool**: Complete the "Discover" step in the DFA Template.  
**Output**: Current Situation  

**Transition to Focus**:  
*“With a clearer understanding of the problem and what we hope to achieve, let’s determine which areas to prioritise and tackle first.”*

---

#### **2. Focus (20 Minutes)**  
**Input**: Current Situation  
**Purpose**: Identify and prioritise critical action areas.  

**Instructions**:  
- Review the insights from the Discover step and determine the most critical areas for immediate action. Focus on elements that can deliver maximum impact within a short timeframe.  
- Use dot voting to identify critical areas for action.
- Use the prompts to facilitate prioritisation and keep the focus on achievable, high-impact areas.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What’s most important to address first?* Prioritise the most critical components.  
- *What can we realistically achieve now?* Focus on actions that are feasible in the short term.  
- *What’s the impact of addressing this now?* Assess the immediate benefit of tackling this priority.  

**Tool**: Use the "Focus" step in the DFA Template to narrow down focus.  
**Output**: Key Priority  

**Transition to Act**:  
*“Now that we’ve identified our top priority, let’s translate it into a clear and actionable plan to begin making progress right away.”*

---

#### **3. Act (20 Minutes)**  
**Input**: Key Priority  
**Purpose**: Develop a clear, actionable plan.  

**Instructions**:  
- Transform your prioritised insights into a concrete plan. Discuss what can be done immediately, assign roles, and ensure the steps are practical and achievable.  
- Assign clear ownership for each action step to avoid ambiguity.
- Use the prompts to guide discussions and craft a detailed, actionable plan that participants can confidently implement.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What one step can we take immediately?* Identify the first step that can be taken without delay.  
- *What resources or support do we need?* Define the necessary tools, people, or resources.  
- *How will we measure progress?* Establish measurable success criteria with clear metrics.  
- *What will success look like?* Define tangible outcomes that signal progress or completion, ensuring alignment with the core objectives.  

**Tool**: Complete the "Act" step in the DFA Template.  
**Output**: Action Plan  

**Transition to Feedback**:  
*“With our plan ready, it’s time to put it into action. Once implemented, we’ll gather feedback to evaluate its effectiveness and refine where necessary.”*

---

### **Next Steps**  
Once the action plan is underway, revisit the DFA Framework regularly to refine priorities or adjust the course as needed. This iterative approach ensures continued progress and improvement.

**Transition to Gathering Feedback**:  
*“After implementing the plan, we’ll reflect on the results to celebrate successes, identify improvements, and continue building on what we’ve accomplished.”*

---

### **Gathering Feedback**  
**Purpose**: Reflect on outcomes after implementing the action plan.  

**Instructions**:  
- Encourage open and honest feedback to identify what worked, what didn’t, and what could be improved. Use this input to refine future plans and adapt as necessary.  

**Prompts**:  
- *What worked well?* Identify successes.  
- *What didn’t work?* Assess challenges and areas for improvement.  
- *How can we refine the plan?* Adjust based on feedback and insights.  

**Closing Reflection**:  
*“Feedback is key to progress. By reflecting on today’s outcomes, we can continue to refine our approach and ensure we’re moving in the right direction.”*

---

### **Features**
- **Duration**: 60 minutes (20 minutes per step).  
- **Audience**: Suitable for individuals, teams, or workshops.  
- **Output**: A focused, actionable plan ready for immediate implementation.  

---

### **DFA Framework Template**
Use this template to guide your session:

| Steps    | Inputs            | Questions                                 | Answers | Outputs           | Artifacts | Notes |
|----------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------|-------------------|-----------|-------|
| Discover | Problem Statement | What’s the issue?                         |         | Current Situation |           |       |
|          |                   | What do we want to achieve?               |         |                   |           |       |
| Focus    | Current Situation | What’s most important to address first?   |         | Key Priorities    |           |       |
|          |                   | What can we realistically achieve now?    |         |                   |           |       |
|          |                   | What’s the impact of addressing this now? |         |                   |           |       |
| Act      | Key Priorities    | What one step can we take now?            |         | Action Plan       |           |       |
|          |                   | What support do we need?                  |         |                   |           |       |
|          |                   | How will we measure progress?             |         |                   |           |       |
|          |                   | What will success look like?              |         |                   |           |       |

---

### **Visual Representation Model**
The DFA Framework is depicted as a **target diagram** with concentric circles:
- Outer Circle: **Discover** (Blue, Magnifying Glass Icon).  
- Middle Circle: **Focus** (Green, Target Icon).  
- Inner Circle: **Act** (Orange, Arrow Icon).  
- Centre Circle: **Action Plan** (Yellow, Star Icon).  

![DFA Framework Model](./resources/DFA-framework.png)

---

### **Examples**
Add Examples [TODO]

---

### **For Experienced Facilitators: Customising the DFA Framework**

The DFA Framework is designed to be adaptable, allowing experienced facilitators to adjust the process to suit their specific needs. Below are some tips for customising the framework:

#### **Customising Prompts**  
Experienced facilitators may have their own preferred prompts or techniques. Feel free to replace the suggested questions with those that best align with the group’s goals and dynamics. For example, instead of asking *“What’s the issue?”*, you might ask more detailed questions like *“What root causes are contributing to this issue?”* or *“What assumptions are we making?”*.

#### **Adjusting Time Slots**  
While the DFA Framework is designed for a 60-minute session, you can adjust the time allocations as needed. For instance:
- **If you have more time**: Consider expanding each step to allow for deeper discussions or additional activities (e.g., group brainstorming, role-playing, or ideation).
- **If you have less time**: Condense the steps by focusing on the most critical questions and streamlining the decision-making process. 

#### **Advanced Facilitation Techniques**  
- **Dot Voting & Prioritisation**: If your group is large, consider using online tools for voting or prioritisation, such as Mentimeter or Miro, to ensure everyone’s input is captured and visible.
- **Breakout Groups**: For larger teams or workshops, split the group into smaller breakout groups during the **Discover** or **Focus** stages. This can help generate more diverse insights and allow for more personalised discussions.
- **Time Management**: Experienced facilitators may want to set stricter time limits for each step, particularly in larger sessions, to ensure focus and avoid long-winded discussions. Use a timer to keep track and signal transitions clearly.

#### **Flexibility in Transitions**  
The transitions between steps are designed to be smooth, but you can adjust them based on your own style and the group’s needs. For example:
- Instead of directly transitioning to the **Focus** step, you might choose to conduct a brief recap of the **Discover** stage before moving forward.
- If your group needs more time to reach consensus or clarity, feel free to extend certain sections of the framework and adjust subsequent steps accordingly.

**Outcome**: This flexibility allows you to adapt the DFA Framework to different environments, goals, and group dynamics, ensuring that it remains an effective tool no matter the context.

---

### **Getting Started**
1. Clone this repository:  
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/uijaz/DFA-Framework.git
   ```  
2. Explore the provided downloadable PDF templates and worksheets in the `resources` folder.  [TODO]
3. Follow the 3-step process in a 60-minute session or at your own pace.  

---

### **Repository Structure**
```
DFA-Framework/
├── README.md                # Project overview  
├── LICENSE                  # License information  
├── resources/               # Templates and worksheets [TODO] 
│   ├── DFA-Framework.png  
└── examples/                # Use case examples [TODO] 
```

---

### **License**
This project is licensed under the **Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 (CC BY 4.0)** for documentation and templates. See the [LICENSE](./LICENSE) file for details.

---

### **Acknowledgements**
Thank you to all contributors and testers of this framework.

---

### **Contributing**
Contributions are welcome! To contribute:  
1. Fork the repository.  
2. Create a new branch for your feature or fix.  
3. Submit a pull request with a clear description of your changes.
4. Contact me below to start the conversation.

---

### **Contact**
For questions or feedback, feel free to reach out via GitHub Issues or connect on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/uijaz/).
